Register stuff:

Shareware:

[5] Registering Gladiator (do it do it do it do it)

  We don't want to beg, but .. please, please PLEASE!! If you think
  our game was at all interesting, at least send us mail with your
  comments and feedback!  You can send email to:
    
    tricket@netcom.com
          or
    mike@ictv.com
          or
    dark@ix.netcom.com
          or even
    clawrenc@icogsci.ucsd.edu

  Of course, if you have any shred of mercy for the four poor starving
  college students (well, now 3 of us have regular jobs, which
  is why gladiator development has slowed down somewhat) who
  have slaved away over hot computers making Gladiator,
  we'd REALLY be your bestest friends, and for just $10.00,
  you get:
    *  Lots more scenarios (take your guys to incredible levels!)
    *  More special abilities (up to four for each character)
    *  More types of characters, and the ability to purchase all of
       them for your team, including:
         FIRE ELEMENTALS (you see a couple on the last castle level)
         FAERIES (freeze your foes!)
         SLIMES (reproduce over and over, and overwhelm your enemies)
         ORCS (an even more powerful grunt)
         GHOSTS (FEAR, fly through walls)
         SKELETONS (really fast!)
    *  Access to the nifty cheat codes. (invisibility, free stats, etc.!)
    *  A scenario editor! (create your own scenarios!)

  Feel FREE to send cash in the mail; we don't care!  
  (But the post office doesn't reccommend it)

  You can also register Gladiator RIGHT NOW over the Internet,
  and be playing it in minutes!  If you have a credit card and
  would like to use it to register Gladiator, visit Albert's
  Ambry, a great play for purchasing software, and search for
  "glad".  The system will take your information and allow you
  to download the latest registered version we have availible.

  If you'd prefer to register by mail, that's fine too!
  Send your payment to:
    
    Gladiator v 3.8 REGISTRATION
    c/o Tom Ricket
    12645 Cambridge Drive
    Saratoga, CA  95070

  If you send a check, make it out to Tom Ricket,
  since the bank may not want to cash it for us otherwise.
  Also, if you have any kind of internet access, please include
  your e-mail address!  This will help us send you information,
  updates, etc. as soon as they're availible!

  Regardless of whether or not you register, PLEASE take the time
  to let us know what you think.  Our best ideas so far have come
  from our testers (radar, diagonal movement, lots of cool stuff),
  and it's a pretty sure bet that whatever you suggest will be
  implemented.  In fact, if you send us money, we can practically
  guarantee it! (unless it's really, really lame!)  We also appreciate
  knowing where you found this; our distribution network is very
  small, and we'd like to be able to send updates to sites which
  have started carrying our game.

  So now that we've made our plea, you can read on for the credits
  and revision history of glad ...



Registered:

[5] Registered Gladiator

  For those of you who have the registered version, don't forget
  to check for updates on our main web page:
  http://www.ictv.com/users/mike/gladiator.html

  From the registered page you can find out what the latest version
  is, how any beta-projects are coming, how to get in contact with
  us via e-mail, and lots of other good things.  Also, feel free to
  drop us a line anytime, with suggestions, criticisms, or just to
  say hello!

  Note that to unzip the registered version off the web site, you'll
  need the password 'Archer', with a capital A.  To specify the
  password to pkunzip, use the "-s" option.
  Example: pkunzip -s glad38g.zip  << it will prompt for the password

