Gladiator version 3.8 Class Information File
(see readme.txt for basic info)

This is a list of Character Information by class.  It covers
all the "standard" and some non-standard classes.  Each
class has a short text description, followed by a brief
summary of any special abilities.  Some specials will have
extra listings for alternate functions; these functions are
accessed by pressing the 'shifter' key in conjunction with
the normal special key.  Classes or specials which are
marked with an ® in front are only available in the
registered version of Gladiator.

Specials marked with a + in front belong to the New Specials
kits.  They are only in play while the New Specials setting
is on (Game Settings -> Gameplay FX -> New Specials; on by
default).  In a networked game the host's setting decides
for everyone.  With the setting off, every class has exactly
the specials listed without a + mark.  Magic costs are given
in brackets; a 'tick' is one step of the game clock.

Soldier:  Your basic grunt, can absorb and deal damage and
        moves moderately fast.  A good all-around fighter.
        A fighter's normal weapon is a magical returning
        blade.  While effective at dealing damage, the
        downside to this is that the fighter must wait for
        his blade to return before throwing it again.
        1.   Charge: The fighter charge is simple but effective.
             When charging, the fighter runs forward at high speed,
             dealing damage to anyone he encounters.
        2. ® Boomerang: The boomerang can be difficult to use
             well, but inflicts much damage.  It spirals out from the
             thrower, inflicting deep wounds on anything it hits.  The
             boomerang can hit multiple targets before falling to earth.
        3. ® Whirl: When a fighter whirls, he lashes out at all
             foes within reach.  Foes hit by such an attack may be pushed
             off balance or stunned.
        4. ® Disarm: A skilled fighter can temporarily disarm a
             nearby opponent.  When disarmed, enemies are unable to fight
             effectively, and often cannot use special abilities.

Barbarian:  Barbarians are tough fighters, but possess more will
            than skill.  In general, they posess strong constitutions
            and impressive strength, but, lacking the training of
            the standard Soldiers, tend to bash their way through
            trouble.  Barbarians fight with a heavy iron hammer, both
            in melee and ranged combat.
            One thing which makes Barbarians unique is their ability
            to resist magical attacks.  While they bleed like any
            other mortal, magic attacks, more often than not, fade off
            their skin without a trace.
            1.   Hurl Boulder: All barbarians have the ability to
                 rip large stones from the nearby ground and hurl them
                 at enemies.  How far they can throw them, and the
                 damage the boulders impart, is strongly affected by
                 the strength of the barbarian.
            2.   Exploding Boulder: Using even more energy, a
                 barbarian can hurl a rock with such strength that it
                 explodes upon impact, damaging any nearby foes.

Elf:    Elves are small and relatively weak, but are harder
        to hit than most classes.  Alone of all the
        standard classes, elves posses the 'ForestWalk'
        ability.  This ability allows them to walk through
        dense forests, passing barriers and avoiding
        enemies.  The more dexterous an elf is, the easier
        she will be able to journey through forest land.
        Elves generally throw stones for their ranged
        attack.
        1.   Rocks: A small handful of rocks.
        2.   Bouncing Rocks: A handful of bouncing rocks.
        3.   Lots of Rocks: An even bigger load of bouncing rocks.
        4.   Mega Rocks: An amazing, huge, load of destructive bouncing
             rock power! :>


Archer: Archers are fleet of foot, and their arrows have a
        long range.  Although they're not as strong or
        healthy as fighters, they can also be a good squad
        backbone.
        1.   Fire Arrows: When pressed, a skilled archer can spin
             quickly around, firing a stream of blazing arrows.  Each of
             these arrows is deadly, and can wreak havoc in crowded
             quarters.
        2.   Barrage: For when accuracy is more important than total
             power, archers can loose a stream of arrows all at one
             target, seriously wounding even the toughest enemy.
        3. ® Exploding Bolt: Unlike the earlier specials, this is
             merely one bolt, but it packs a lot of punch.  Not only does
             the flaming arrow deal more damage than normal, these bolts
             explode on impact, damaging friend or foe!

Mage:   Mages are slow, nearly defenseless, and horrible at
        hand-to-hand combat, but their magical energy balls
        pack a big punch.  All mages, regardless of level,
        posses the ability to teleport out of (or into!)
        danger, providing they've saved enough magic.
        1.   Teleport: Mages often teleport out of (or into!) danger
             all over the battlefield.  While immensely useful in
             escaping or exploring, the standard teleport spell is non-
             directional, and the casting mage has no control over the
             final destination.  SHIFTER: The alternate, more advanced
             teleport is really a form of 'Dimension Door,' and allows
             the mage to pick a location, memorize it, and return there
             at will.  This skill requires more intelligence than even a
             normal mage, and the number of uses of the memorized spot is
             also determined by intelligence.
        2.   Warp Space: While Warp Space can be used offensively,
             it is generally used as a defense by a surrounded mage.
             Casting this spell will twist the fabric of space around the
             mage, damaging nearby opponents.  The duration and size of
             the twist are proportional to the amount of magic the mage
             possesses when the spell is cast.
        3. ® Time Stop: Only powerful mages are able to freeze
             time at all, let alone for a subjectively long duration.
             When the spell is cast, time stops for everything not on the
             mage's team.  Although this can be immensely powerful, be
             warned, as no magic will be generated during this frozen
             moment.
        4. ® Energy Wave: Somewhat akin to a modern-day flame-
             thrower, a mage's energy wave releases an enormous,
             expanding flood of energy outward.  The energy wave, being
             non-corporeal, will pass through walls and other
             impediments, and can inflict damage on many enemies before
             fading away.
       5.  ® HeartBurst:  This awesome spell comes only to the most powerful
             of mages.  By concentrating his own life energies, a mage
             can send forth an explosive aura of energy, causing nearby
             foes to burst into flames from their inner depths!  The more
             magic posessed when casting this spell, the stronger the effect
             will be.  The damage is spread among all enemies in range.

ArchMage:  When a Mage has reached the sixth level or higher, she may
           choose to specialize and become an ArchMage.  An ArchMage
           takes the learnings of the Magi one step further, posessing
           extraordinary firepower at the expense of physical weakness.
           Even more than for a normal Mage, an ArchMage's powers all
           hinge upon how much Intelligence is posessed.  An ArchMage
           shares some spells with the standard Mage class, but quickly
           gains other spells for high damage.
           1.   Teleport: Like normal mages, ArchMages posess the ability
                to teleport into and out of danger.  Similarly,
                intelligent ArchMages can use the alternate form of this
                ability (SHIFTER) to place a marker, so as to memorize
                a location to return to.
           2. ® HeartBurst:  This spell is a more powerful version of
                the standard mage's HeartBurst (5th level), and functions
                in the same manner.
                SHIFTER:  By using the alternate version of an ArchMage's
                second-level ability, the spell 'Chain Lightning' is
                called forth.  Here, the ArchMage shoots out a bolt of
                lightning, powered by excess mana.  The bolt will seek out
                a nearby enemy, and upon impact, split into multiple new
                bolts, which will seek their own targets.  In crowded
                quarters, this spell can incinerate an entire room of the
                foe with one continuous blast!
           3.   Summon Image:  By means of an intricate yet relatively
                unexpensive spell, an ArchMage can summon forth an image
                of a brave warrior to fight for his team.  Should the
                enemy accept the illusion as real, this phantom can inflict
                real damage upon the foe.  Once pricked by the point of
                any weapon, however, the illusion will vanish back into
                the ether.
                SHIFTER:  More powerful than illusion, a strong ArchMage
                may summon forth an elemental of fire.  This spell,
                however, comes with both a blessing and a curse -- for
                the lifeforce of this elemental is linked to that of the
                ArchMage, and while this may infuse the daemon with extra
                sustaining health, it can also weaken the archmage to
                a perilous condition!
           4.   Mind Control:  For a short time, powerful ArchMages may
                control the minds of those around them, bending their
                enemies to their will.  The more magical enery the
                ArchMage has availible, the stronger the control will
                be, and the greater number of foes will be enslaved.

Cleric: Clerics, like mages, are slow, but have a stronger
        hand-to-hand attack.  Clerics posses abilities
        related to healing and, on the darker side,
        interaction with the dead.  Clerics have the unique
        ability to generate fields which their teammates
        can pass through, but which foes must hack down to
        pass.
        1.   Heal: Even the lowest cleric possesses the gods-granted
             ability to heal others.  Due to the nature of this gift, a
             cleric can heal several friends, if gathered closely around,
             for the mana cost of a single spell.  The higher level a
             cleric is, the stronger this healing power will become.
             NOTE: clerics controlled by the computer who are on your
             team will automatically attempt to heal any wounded team
             member who 'bumps' them.
             SHIFTER:  Although normally beings of peace, even Clerics
             sometimes need a strong defense to keep their lifeblood
             flowing.  Thus, every Cleric soon learns the 'Mystic Mace'
             spell, which conjurs an ethereal mace to defend against
             blows, and strike any foe who gets too close.  Although
             several of these 'maces' may be summoned at one time, the
             strength of each is determined by the amount of magical
             energy put into it, and thus one strong mace may be more
             effective than several weaker ones.
        2.   Raise Undead: This clerical ability allows the caster
             to temporarily bring back fallen foes or friends, and have
             them fight once more.  The strength of this recalled zombie,
             as well as its duration upon the battlefield, depends both
             on the cleric's power and the strength of the one who is
             raised.  When the undead falls again, no power available can
             bring it back.
             SHIFTER: The reverse of raise undead, Turn Undead has
             the power to ultimately send the walking dead back to
             their realm.
        3.   Raise Ghost: This stronger version of Raise Undead
             brings back not the bodies of those who have fallen, but the
             spirit.  Such a ghost has the advantage of being ethereal
             and traveling anywhere, as well has possessing stronger
             powers of attack than a mere zombie.
             SHIFTER: As with Raise Undead, a knowledgable cleric has
             the power not only to bring forth sprits, but also to
             lay them to rest.  This level of Turn Undead will affect
             both zombies and ethereal spirits.
        4. ® Resurrect: This ultimate power of the clerics puts
             the art of raising the dead to shame.  With this spell, a
             powerful cleric can reunite the body and soul of a fallen
             comrade, healing most wounds in the process.  Be warned,
             however, that such an endeavor is extremely taxing to both
             the one who is raised and the casting cleric.


Thief:  Thieves are fast and stronger of constitution than
        the magic-wielders, though not so potent as the
        soldier.  Like fighters, thieves wield stabbing and
        throwing blades.  Although their blades are not
        magical, they posses an unlimited supply and can
        throw them in rapid succession.
        1.   Plant Bomb: All thieves can drop small, hand-made
             explosives to the ground, often able to take out even the
             strongest opponent.  Beware, however, for unlike an archer's
             arrows, bombs do not discriminate in who they destroy!
           + SHIFTER: Mine (70): Instead of a lit bomb, a thief can
             bury a mine, for twice the bomb's magic.  A mine has no
             fuse: it waits, unseen by the enemy (the thief's own team
             sees a faint shimmer), until a foe on foot steps on it,
             then explodes with a full bomb's force.  Flying foes drift
             over it untouched.  A thief may have three mines down at
             once; each lasts 600 ticks plus 30 per thief level, and a
             blast sets off any other mine of the same team within 24
             pixels.  Mines stay armed after their thief falls.  From
             level 7 a mine also leaves a short puff of poison.
        2. ® Cloak: A moderately experienced thief can learn to
             hide in even the smallest shadows, slipping unseen past
             enemy patrols.  How good the 'cloaking' is, and how long the
             thief can maintain it, depends on both the dexterity and
             level of the practicer.  A thief on your team who is cloaked
             will show up with an outline, so that you know where she is.
        3. ® Taunt: While some would think it insane, thieves have
             made an art of taunting their enemies.  A skilled thief can
             lure her enemies away from their chosen targets, often
             leading them on a fruitless chase, until the rest of the
             team can wipe them up.
             SHIFTER: When not taunting their enemies, thieves may be
             charming them instead.  Masters of inducing paranoia and
             charm, a clever thief can at times convince his worst enemy
             to help him out for a while.
        4. ® Poison Cloud: The ability to create billowing clouds
             of poison is the thief's other offensive weapon.  By
             gathering up harmless elements and combining them, a thief
             can create a truly noxious concoction, which when smashed
             from its container will quickly expand into the air,
             bringing airborne pain and confusion to nearby enemies.


Druid:  Druids are the magicians of nature, and have
        special powers over natural events.  Druids can
        throw lightning bolts at their foes; the bolts have
        long range and are very fast.
        1.   Grow Tree: The simplest druid magic is that of planting
             and growing trees.  While this might seem pointless, the
             druid imbues these saplings with his own energy, and the
             trees will allow friends to pass without hindrance, but
             severely impede any enemies trying to slip past.
        2.   Summon: The druid power to summon forth sprites and
             faeries from the woodlands is well known.  These summoned
             sprites will take off in pursuit of enemies, flying over the
             landscape and freezing foes in their tracks.
        3. ® Reveal Items: The druid's power to magically reveal
             items to his sight most often used when searching for gold
             or other treasure.  At other times, this sight aids in the
             searching out of enemy encampments or fortifications.  When
             Reveal is cast, gold, silver, potions, and creature
             generators will show up on the radar map, but only to the
             caster.
        4. ® Protection: A high level druid can protect his
             friends with this natural invocation.  By summoning forth
             small currents of winds to envelop nearby team members, the
             druid can help make his comrades harder to hit by both close
             and long range attacks.  Subsequent castings will strengthen
             and prolong the effect.


® Orc:  Orcs are your basic 'grunt' fighter; strong and
        hard to hurt, but without much intelligence or
        ability to do more than inflict pain.  Basic orcs
        don't have a ranged attack, but their damage at
        close range is impressive.
        1.   Howl: An orc's howl of rage has an almost magical
             quality about it.  Those nearby are often stunned, unable to
             move or defend themselves.  How long this effect lasts
             depends on the distance between the orc and its foe and
             their respective levels.
        2.   Eat Corpse: Other members of the team tend to ignore
             the orc's ability of eating the corpses of the enemy (and
             sometimes friend).  Nevertheless, the strength and power
             gained by this barbarous act cannot be denied.


Orc Captain:  An orc of level 5 or more may be promoted to
        Orc Captain on the DETAILS screen; captains cannot be hired.
        The promoted captain starts again at level 1, with Howl
        alone; Eat Corpse comes back at level 4.  Captains are
        stronger and smarter than the basic orc, and throw blades
        across the field.  Before the New Specials kits a promoted
        orc lost its Howl and Eat Corpse; with the setting on, it
        keeps them.
        1. + Howl (25): The orc's howl of rage, as above.  A bot
             captain howls when a foe is within 130 pixels.
        2. + Eat Corpse (20): The orc's corpse feast, as above.  A
             bot captain eats only below 60 percent of its health,
             standing on a corpse.
        3. + Hook Blade (40): A chained knife spirals out from the
             captain like a boomerang, from 12 to 60 pixels over 24
             ticks and back over 24, cutting down enemy missiles that
             come near.  The first foe it touches is frozen and
             reeled to the captain's feet, 8 pixels a tick, then
             stays frozen 12 ticks more; a wall stops the reel.  Only
             one blade may be out at a time.
             SHIFTER: Knife Fan (30): Three plain knives thrown in a
             spread.
        4. + War Banner (80): A banner can only be planted on a
             corpse within 32 pixels, which it consumes: the fallen
             one's head goes on the pole.  It has 120 hitpoints plus
             10 per captain level and stands for 900 ticks, even if
             its captain falls.  Every 8 ticks it heals each ally
             within 96 pixels by 1, and frightens every foe within
             that radius whose level is below the captain's; allies
             in its radius never flee.  Enemies can chop it down.
             Planting a second banner strikes the captain's first one
             quietly and sends his grunts to the new one.
             SHIFTER: Warband (80): Orc grunts charge in from the
             nearest map edge: two at level 10, one more for every
             three levels after that, never more than six alive at
             once.  They fight at half the captain's level for 400
             ticks, never flee, and fall with their captain.  If a
             banner stands they run to it; otherwise they run to the
             captain.


® Fire Elemental:  Fire elementals have been known to strike
        terror into even the toughest of warriors.  Strong
        and relatively quick, their flaming meteors can
        inflict hideous wounds upon an enemy, and their
        speed and size make them dangerous opponents even
        without this ability.
        1.   Starburst: Fire elementals have the ability to release
             a 'starburst' of flaming death in all directions; this
             natural defense will sometimes destroy an enemy even as the
             fire elemental itself perishes.
        2. + Immolate (30, then 2 a tick): The elemental becomes a
             living bonfire for up to 200 ticks.  Each tick, foes
             touching it burn for 6 damage plus its level (double for
             the foe who last struck it).  Every 4 ticks it leaves an
             ember behind; an ember lasts 40 ticks and every 6 ticks
             burns any foe on it for 4 damage plus half the level.
             Pressing special again quenches the flame for free;
             until then the elemental casts nothing else.  The fire
             goes out on its own when the magic runs dry.
        3. + Meteor Rain (70): Meteors fall around a foe up to 160
             pixels away for 60 ticks, one every 6 ticks, each a
             blast of 8 damage plus twice the level landing within 40
             pixels of the spot.  The elemental is never hurt by its
             own rain.
        4. + Rekindle (40): Burns magic into health: 40 hitpoints
             plus 4 per level.
             SHIFTER: Supernova (10): The elemental gives up all of
             its health for one enormous explosion: one and a half
             times its health plus 15 per level, with eight more
             blasts of half that 40 pixels out around it.  Allies are
             hit in full.  Its parting starburst fires on top of it.

® Skeleton:   Skeletons are the pathetic remains of those
        who once were among the living.  Although they are
        not particularly dangerous, they move with blinding
        speed, and often surround a living enemy to take it
        to the grave.
        1.   Tunnel: These bone-wielding undead have the ability to
             tunnel quickly underground, sometimes emerging under their
             hapless victim's feet.  When manipulated by an intelligent
             mind, this ability also allows them to tunnel under walls
             and come at the enemy from the rear.
        2. + Dig In (15): The skeleton sinks into the floor, hidden
             from its enemies, trading 1 magic for 1 hitpoint every 4
             ticks.  When a foe on foot comes within 20 pixels it
             bursts up swinging at it; it also comes up when special
             is pressed again (free), when its magic runs out, or
             after 300 ticks.  It needs 8 magic to spare after the
             price to go down at all.
        3. + Bone Wall (30): A line of three bone barricades rises in
             front of the skeleton, each with 40 hitpoints plus 4 per
             level, standing for 360 ticks.  Allies pass through;
             enemies must go around or hack them down.  Enemy missiles
             often pass through the gaps.
             SHIFTER: Bone Storm (45): Every bone wall the skeleton
             has standing shatters into its own eight-way burst.
             Nothing flies from the skeleton itself, and with no wall
             standing the storm is refused.
        4. + Reassemble (60): Wards the skeleton against its next
             death: it falls apart, then stands back up with a
             quarter of its full health.  The ward lasts 360 ticks
             and costs 1 magic every 6 ticks; it fades when either
             runs out.
             SHIFTER: Legion (60): For the next 300 ticks half the
             foes this skeleton kills (save the undead), on the toss
             of a coin, rise as skeletons on its team, at half the
             fallen foe's level; the others stay where they fell.

® Ghost: A more fearsome type of undead, ghosts can pass
        through walls, trees, and anything else that gets
        in their way.  Although they cannot inflict damage
        from a distance, their chilling touch can bring
        death quickly at close range.
        1.   Scare: A ghost's haunting wail can cause even the bravest 
             of warriors to flee in terror.  When invoked, all nearby 
             enemies will flee away from the ghost; how far they run, 
             and how long the effect lasts, is determined by the power 
             of the ghost and the resistance of the targets.
           + SHIFTER: Wail (50): A fright that leaps from foe to foe.
             A small cloud of the scare's sparkles drifts at the
             nearest foe in scare range, slower than a bolt; each foe
             it strikes flees as from a scare, and it may split toward
             other foes within 120 pixels of the one it struck,
             leaping at most three more times.
        2. + Siphon (30): The ghost's chilling touch (24 pixels)
             deals 10 damage plus 2 per level and heals the ghost by
             half of what it dealt, never above its full health.  It
             touches once per attack pause, however long the key is
             held.  A touch that finds no one still spends the magic.
        3. + Possess (50): The ghost slips inside a foe within 24
             pixels and drives it: the host's own weapon, the host's
             own specials.  The host may resist (the ghost's level
             against its constitution); a resisting host strikes back
             once.  Undead, heroes driven by a player, and foes
             already possessed or charmed cannot be taken.  The ride
             lasts 120 ticks (10 seconds) on a host of the ghost's own
             level or higher, and grows with the log of the levels the
             ghost has over it: 29 seconds two levels up, 49 seconds
             nine levels up, never more than a minute.
             It ends when time runs out, when the host dies (the ghost
             takes half of the killing blow's excess as damage), or
             when the player presses Switch Character.  The ghost
             reappears where the host stood.
        4. + Phase (60): For 48 ticks the ghost goes fully spectral:
             nothing can harm it or bump it, and it moves at double
             speed, but it cannot attack.

® Faerie: The flying faerie are diminutive in stature, flying
        above friends and enemies alike unnoticed.
        Although they are delicate and easily destroyed,
        faeries can sprinkle a magic powder which can
        freeze their enemies in place.
        1. + Blink (20): A hop of 24 pixels plus 2 per level in a
             random direction (a shorter one when that way is
             blocked), then a rest of one second on top of her attack
             pause, so a held key hops once.
             SHIFTER: Swap (24): The faerie trades places with the
             nearest friend or foe within 80 pixels in plain sight.  A
             walker is never swapped onto a spot it could not stand on,
             such as water.
        2. + Glimmer (24): Freezing powder sprinkled in all eight
             directions at once; it freezes for a quarter of the
             normal sprinkle's time.
        3. + Hasten (30): Touches an ally within 40 pixels with speed
             for 150 ticks (a speed potion's bonus; a stronger bonus
             already running is kept).
             SHIFTER: Haste Self (30): The same, on the faerie herself.
        4. + Wish (100): The faerie pops, and a fallen ally within
             120 pixels rises where it fell, at full health, while every
             living ally within 96 pixels is fully healed.  The whole
             party's reset, bought with the faerie.

® Slime: It is hard to say if a slime is truly intelligent,
        or simply some form of lichen too agitated to
        remain still.  Although generally peaceful in
        nature, slimes can make dangerous enemies when
        disturbed.  From what has been observed of slimes,
        they begin life as small, relatively harmless
        patches of ooze which grow until they are bigger
        than a man.  These large patches of slime then
        split into two or more small slimes, thus
        increasing the population.  Slimes are particularly
        vulnerable to fire or magical attacks.
        1.   Grow: Slimes can grow larger, or split in two, when
             they gain enough magical energy.

